[Music]
hello everybody and welcome back to
another episode of night sky news your
monthly space news distraction from
everything going on in the real world
and this month it's all about my
favorite topic black holes but before we
get to that let's take a look at the
things that we can spot in the night sky
this month because even though we're all
in lockdown one thing that we can all do
whether it be from a window or a balcony
or those who were lucky enough a garden
is to look up so on Thursday the 16th of
April which when this video goes live
will be tomorrow so early birds you'll
be able to catch this one the moon in
the early morning sky literally right
before dawn is gonna be in a nice line
with three planets Mars Saturn Jupiter
which will all be along the ecliptic
that sort of line which is the plane of
the solar system in the sky where all
the solar system objects move along now
if you're watching this after the 16th
don't worry because you will have
another chance to spot this in twenty
eight days time when the moon comes back
again the time it's sort of May 11th to
May 14th and if it's clear all that time
you'll be able to watch the moon going
from sort of nearby Jupiter on the 11th
to sort of getting lower and lower when
you look at the same time each night so
that by the 14th it's again underneath
them all nearest to Mars then on the
19th we've got the Lyrid meteor shower
and so all of these meteors are going to
look like they're streaking across the
sky from the constellation of Lyra so
what you can do is find that
constellation and then essentially sort
of put the top of your head sort of
facing that constellation so that you're
turning away from it essentially because
what you want to be able to do is look
at the sky where the meteors are going
to be streaking away from it rather than
the point where they all start because
you'll miss the wall otherwise so the
closest to the equator you are the more
likely you are to see meteors from the
shower because it means the
constellation of lyre will be much
higher overhead so you've essentially
got like the whole sky that they'll be
streaking away from the best time to
look for these is pre-dawn on the
nineteenth death
after midnight at least because you want
it to be as dark as possible to be able
to see the meteors but you also want the
moon to not be in the sky because the
moon is really bright and will sort of
wash out a lot of the fainting meteors
and so the moon is gonna be setting
around dawn time so that's gonna be in
the time when the moon isn't quite as
bright so best time to look for them
pre-dawn on the 19th of April then on
the 25th and 26th of April it's my
favorite sight to look out for in the
night sky again a toenail moon very
close to Venus so I call it a toenail
moon that's not its official name it's a
very thin crescent moon but it looks
like toenails so that's what I call it
looks the West just after sunset and you
should be able to find this venus is the
brightest thing in the sky at the moment
so it should be pretty obvious on the
25th the moon will be above it and on by
the 26th the moon will be below it so if
you do manage to spot it send me your
photos even if they're taken with just a
smartphone smartphones are great these
days Astro photography some of the new
ones send me whatever you manage to see
like a lot of people did this month I
really enjoy seeing those photos
especially because this is really one of
the last chances we're gonna get to spot
sort of Venus in the toenail moon
because 28 days later when the moon
actually comes back to its toenail phase
Venus will have dropped quite low in the
sky and be very close to the horizon so
much so that by the end of May actually
it will almost have completely set and
we won't be able to see Venus in the
evening sky anymore then from the 4th to
the 6th of May we have the peak of the
e2
Aquarians meteor shower so another
meteor shower we can look out for again
after midnight is when you want to
really look for these because the sky
will be much darker but will also be
contending with the moon again so this
is another one of those pre-dawn meteor
showers if you want to get up a bit
earlier and see if you can spot
something the easiest way to sort of put
the radiant of the meteor shower to the
back of your head in this time is going
to actually be to find Mars it should be
fairly easy to find Mars cause it'll be
that reddish looking thing you know sort
of in the southeast guys so find that
turn your back on it and look at the
rest of the sky and hopefully you should
be able to spot some meteors then then
on the 6th of May if you missed this
month's super moon that just happened
the super pink moon everyone
raving about where the moon wasn't
actually going to look pink the pink
moon name comes from sort of Native
American traditional names for the full
moons in different months and any full
moon in April is always called the pink
moon because it coincides with the
blooming of some pink flowers well on
the 6th of May there's also going to be
another super moon this one is going to
be the super flower moon again something
to do with flowers in Native American
traditional culture it's still a super
moon because the moon is sort of at its
closest point to us in its oval-shaped
orbit it's not going to be as close as
the moon was in April to us but it's
still close enough to classify as a
super moon this is the third and final
soon of 2020 though so if you want to
get out take some pictures of the moon
when it's nice and low on the horizon
you and you have that perspective of you
know the size of things to compare it to
so it does look bigger it's just an
illusion though it's exactly the same
size when it's low on their eyes and as
it is high in the sky it's little to do
with sort of how your eyes perceive the
size of it but last chance to to get out
there and get those beautiful pictures
that you want and then again send them
to me if you manage to spot it now
moving on it to space news now because
even though all of us are in lockdown
the universe and science does not stop
all right so first up a gorgeous picture
to start with look at this image of the
surface of the asteroid Bennu this was
taken by NASA's osiris-rex spacecraft
which if you remember is planning to
land on the surface of been you get a
sample of the asteroid and return it to
earth in the next couple of years which
is a very exciting mission so this is
2155 high-res images that have been
stitched together to make this amazing
mosaic you might just think that it is a
pretty image but actually this was
necessary first iris Rex's mission
because it needed to map the surface of
Benny fully before it decided on a
landing spot that was safe that it was
going to be free of rubble and boulders
and provide a nice sort of flat smooth
landing spot for it so the team are now
analyzing that image in great detail to
try and figure out where to actually
land mosaic and one of my favorite
favorite things on space Twitter this
month you know if you're not involved
with space Twitter like get involved
because it's amazing some of the stuff
on there is just incredible and hear
what the actual team osiris-rex have
been doing is playing this game with the
hashtag where is that Boulder on Benny
where they take you know like crop out
one of the boulders from the main image
and be like we're actually if this
Boulder I'm Benny when you're gonna
figure it out
so all those jokes about you know not
being able to play where's Wally in
lockdown and social distancing because
it's just too easy you know you've got
where is that Boulder on Bennett it's
like it's dead so sticking with rocky
objects in the solar system I want to
take a minute just to talk about comet
atlas so this is a comment that is
visible in our night sky at the minute
it's sort of on its orbit where it's
coming closer to the Sun I think it just
crossed
Mars is orbit so it's getting closer to
us all the time and it's visible if you
have you know sort of a medium sized
telescope you know a decent sort of
amateur telescope and I hadn't actually
mentioned it on this channel yet because
it was forecast to get brighter as the
week's went by sort of into April and
May and if it did that it would
eventually be visible maybe with the
naked eye and the reason comments get
brighter as they get closer towards the
Sun is you know
of the ice in them starts to melt that
starts to out gas that tends to reflect
a lot of light and it's a lot easier to
see them and of course also it's closer
to us so it's easier to see it as well
rather than when it's further away now
that was what was forecast but comments
are known to be wildly unpredictable and
this one didn't really disappoint either
instead of getting brighter what now
people are thinking has happened is that
the comet has actually broken up and
disintegrated now at the time of filming
that hasn't been fully confirmed yet
whether that has happened the first clue
we had was images taken by some
professional astronomers at a
professional Observatory where they had
observed that instead of the tail of the
comet guessing longer light would be
expected if you know it was typically
melting and outgassing as it got close
to the Sun and getting brighter
instead the nucleus of the comet was
sort of elongating actually you know the
very center where the sort of rocky body
and everything all the outgassing was
coming from and when that happens at
least when we've seen that before with
other comets the comet has broken up and
disintegrated just because you know
because of all the ice melting and the
gases being heated up by getting closer
at the Sun and therefore outgassing a
lot of what was holding that comet
together is no longer there so instead
it breaks apart after those professional
images were taken that have also been
some amateur images taken as well that
appear to show that the comet might be
in pieces but again time of recording
that hasn't been confirmed but I guess
editing Becky at some point we'll put a
banner down here telling you what
actually happened to this comment
editing Becky here from the future yeah
that thing's toast then a bit of sad
news that I just want to cover and that
was the passing of Margaret
Burbage on the 5th of April 2020 at a
hundred years of age so an incredible
age that she really did live to she was
a giant of astronomy in the 20th century
and the 21st century even as well she
was the first author on a paper in 1957
with Geoffrey Burbidge William Fowler
and Fred Hoyle and this laid out the
hypothesis that all elements in the
universe are made
in stars something we call stellar
nucleosynthesis I you know nuclear
fusion produces everything from helium
to lithium to carbon to oxygen to
nitrogen to all the way up to iron so
that oft-quoted phrase of we're all made
from Stardust comes from Margaret
Babbage's work she then went on to study
quasars for years she ended up finding
the most distant quasar known at the
time it was a redshift of 3.5 and that
record held for eight years despite the
fact that early in her career you know
she was denied positions at
observatories because you know they were
male only observatories only men were
allowed to use the telescopes for some
reason she ended up being the director
of the Royal Greenwich observatories in
London she also became the first female
president of the SS the American
Astronomical Society and if that wasn't
enough during the eighties she also
helped to design the faint object
spectrograph that went onto the hubble
space telescope and then in the 90s used
that instrument along with the huge team
of people she'd amassed over the years
to prove that at the center of the
galaxy Messier 82
I clearly man m87 and not m82 I just
apparently can't read my own handwriting
there was a supermassive black hole at
the center of it which for me personally
is you know the cherry on top of the
cake that was her career she really was
a trailblazer campaigning so much
against the discrimination of women in
astronomy you know both negative
discrimination and positive
discrimination you know no one wants a
pat on the back just because you're a
woman like wow you did that and you're a
woman no so I'm sure you'll agree that
her impact on astronomy was huge both
the research side of things and the
societal change that really allows me to
do the job that I love to do today so
I'm very thankful for all her efforts so
even though this is a bit of sad news
that I'm reporting I hope you will join
me this evening in raising a glass to
Margaret verbage
now the rest of the pieces of news I
have for you are all black hole related
so the first one of those was from a
paper by Lynn and collaborators this
month that we're looking at this problem
of where are all the intermediate mass
black holes these things that we call
the missing link black holes between
stellar-mass black holes and
supermassive black holes so stellar-mass
black holes are those that are round
about the same mass our stars so
anywhere from say like five times the
mass of the Sun ish to about hundred
times the mass of the Sun ish and
they're usually found in a binary system
so that's two objects that are orbiting
around each other two stars a star in a
black hole a star on a neutron star a
white and often a neutron star whatever
it is and in fact our Sun is actually
quite rare it's not normal in the fact
that it's actually alone and not in a
binary system and the reason that we
find a lot of these stellar-mass black
holes in binary systems is because those
black holes tend to get a bit greedy
they tend to pull material off the star
that they're orbiting that material then
starts to spiral around that black hole
and as it does it heats up and it starts
to glow in x-rays and so we often detect
the x-rays that are from this material
that's spiraling around the black hole
that is the same way we also intersect
supermassive black holes as well just on
a much larger scale these are black
holes that are found in the very Centers
of galaxies and again if they are active
black holes ie they are getting a bit
greedy or hungry and taking in material
from the space around them and causing
this material to sort of form this
spiraling disk around the black hole
then that disk will heat up because a
friction get very very hot and start
glowing in x-rays and so we see lots of
x-ray sources that are incredibly
incredibly bright compared to the binary
x-ray binaries that we see where we see
stellar-mass black holes and we find
those in the Centers of galaxies and
these supermassive black holes are
anywhere from so millions to billions of
times the mass of the Sun and there's
lots of questions still in astrophysics
about how they grew that big at least
that quickly when that sort of
found in the very early universe but the
other question that still outstanding is
well what about these intermediate-mass
black holes in the middle the things
that are sort of hundreds to hundreds of
thousands of times the mass of the Sun
haven't really found anything in that
regime so that's why we call it this
missing link between the small and the
incredibly massive black holes the only
things we do have in that regime we tend
to term as candidate black holes we're
not entirely sure that they actually are
black holes there's no agreed-upon
method for finding and confirming that
that's what they are but this paper by
Lin and collaborated this month was
trying to confirm that a candidate
intermediate-mass black hole was
actually an intermediate mass black hole
so back in 2018 the same authors of this
paper that just got published this month
published a paper saying they found one
of these high luminosity x-ray sources
so brighter than the black holes in the
binaries that are around about the same
mass of stars but known as bright as the
supermassive black holes in the center
of galaxies and they said the most
likely hypothesis to explain this was
that it was an intermediate mass black
hole in a very dense star cluster so you
know if you've got a lot of gas
concentrated in one place you can all of
a sudden pop up and form lots and lots
of stars all at the same time they're
then sort of you know bound together by
gravity into this big group or cluster
and so if there was an intermediate mass
black hole in this cluster then what
would happen if a star got too close and
it was sort of again stripped of a lot
of its matter as it sort of flew past
this black hole that matter falling in
on the black hole heated up and started
to glow in x-rays and from the
brightness of the x-rays you can
estimate the mass of the black hole and
they did that and they found that it was
maybe 50 thousand times the mass of the
Sun so definitely in this sort of middle
regime between the stellar mass and the
super mass but what they couldn't
confirm in that previous paper was
whether this hypothesis of it being in a
star cluster on the very edge of a
galaxy that was 805 million light years
away or
there it was actually much closer to us
in our own galaxy and it was actually
just a neutron star glowing in x-rays
and that's why it was so bright because
it was so much closer to us so what
they've done here in this new paper that
came out this month was actually try and
find this star cluster at the same
position of they've seen this x-ray
coming from so they actually took the
Hubble Space Telescope which is you know
best telescope really great for seeing
detail quite far away which is an
optical telescope and so you wouldn't be
able to see the neutron star in optical
in visible light that we can see with
our eyes but you would be able to see
the star cluster which is made of normal
stars and so what they found with the
Hubble Space Telescope is they've been
able to just resolve this sort of tiny
patch of this star cluster on the edge
of this galaxy and also then confirm
that it was at the same distance as the
galaxies as well and so now they're
saying this hypothesis of it being this
intermediate mass black hole giving off
these x-rays where these x-rays are at
the exact same position as that star
cluster they found in the optical data
that hypotheses are now much more likely
and so this makes it a much stronger
candidate for being one of these
intermediate-mass black holes next up
Bela data and collaborators have found a
record-breaking blazer this month now
you might be asking what in the universe
is a blazer well you might have heard of
a quasar and a blazer is basically a
special type of quasar so a quasar is a
hungry supermassive black hole it's a
supermassive black hole that is
currently taking in material a very high
rate so I guess it's a greedy
supermassive black hole and it means
that the x-ray emission that we get from
this black hole in the center of this
galaxy is so incredibly incredibly
bright and it means that we can see them
at much higher distance than we can see
say galaxies without an active hungry
black hole which are just starlight and
so quasars were really the furthest
objects that we were able to detect very
early on like Margaret Burbidge did and
sometimes what happens to those quasars
is that they will burp now I've talked
about these black
Cole perps before on my channel and
essentially what it means is that if you
put too much material into that region
where the black hole is all at once for
it to sort of eat it all at once the
pressure builds and builds and builds
and before even that material has
crossed that point of no return by the
black hole the easiest least energetic
thing the black hole can do to ease that
pressure is to throw a load of it back
out either in a big wind or in one of
these really cool jets that come out
sort of the pores of the black hole
again it's not coming from the black
hole itself because you know what
anything actually falls into a black
hole it can't get out again but it's
coming from this region around the black
hole
and so those Jets often contribute to
the brightness of these quasars they
tend to be able to see that in radio
emission as well and so a quasar is
essentially any of these objects where
we can see it from you know any angle
right we might be seeing the accretion
disk face arm we might be seeing it at
some angle and again the Jets will come
out at any angle to us a blazar is
essentially a quasar that we see
directly down the Jets the jet is
pointing straight at us and that is a
really good angle to be out because it's
so much brighter so they're very easy to
spot especially at high distances so
this blazer is PSO Jane or three naught
nine four seven point four nine plus two
seven one seven five seven point three
one snappy name I know and it was found
using the VLA Sky Survey in the radio to
look for the jet and then also the large
binocular telescope in Arizona to look
for the visible galaxies counterpart
that this quasar is or this blazer I
should say is living in and also by
getting the visible light they managed
to get the redshift of the blaze are
hosting galaxies as well and found that
it was a redshift of six point one which
means that when that light was released
and started its journey towards us the
universe was only around nine hundred
million year
as old also so this is light from the
very early universe making it to us and
that nine hundred million years or so is
right on the edge of sort of the time we
think it takes for stellar-mass black
holes to grow to become supermassive
black holes so it's a very interesting
area of science to probe in order to
able to understand how they grow that
big that quickly and in a sort of jet
production that's coming towards us to
ideally though we need more of these
Blazers at that kind of distance at that
redshift and hopefully the LSST the
large synoptic survey telescope will
give us that it's scheduled for first
light in 2020 fingers crossed that that
timescale still holds because a lot of
it has actually been delayed with
everything that's going on at the minute
but hopefully when that does come online
we'll find more and more of these things
hopefully a lot easier as well with this
better telescope and then we'll be able
to do some really cool sort of science
and statistics on these things so
sticking on the theme of Blazers for our
last piece of news on my livestream last
week where I opened my hundred thousand
subscribers black from YouTube someone
asked me whether you know I had heard
about this news before the rest of you
and no I heard about it as soon as it
hit the headlines just like everybody
else this was work by Kim and
collaborators at the event horizon
telescope collaboration so you remember
the event horizon telescope took that
image of the black hole at the center of
Messier 87 it was such famous image
they've estimated that something like
five billion people worldwide have
actually seen this image so I hope you
all remember it from last year I did a
video on it about why it was so
incredible and how they did it and
whilst most of us were expecting that
the next piece of work that would come
from the event horizon telescope team
would be an image of the center of our
own Milky Way in the black hole there
which is proving a little bit difficult
I think because it's a lot closer so
it's much smaller black hole and there's
a lot more to sort of look through when
you're looking towards the center of our
galaxy as well but I'm sure that's
coming soon but what we were treated to
this month was a study on the blazer
3c2 7-9 which happened to just be
the background of that original image of
m87
they took now they're pretty far away
from each other on the sky so it just
shows you like how huge these images of
the sky radio telescopes actually take
compared to say optical images which
just look at you know a tiny fraction of
the size of the full moon every time
they take an image now they couldn't
resolve the actual accretion disk of
this galaxy like they did for m87 you
know they're they actually showed this
material sort of spiraling around the
black hole and saw that black hole
shadow because this galaxy is actually
ten billion light years away compared to
m87 six million light years away so you
can see how much further it actually is
but what they were able to resolve was
really the shape and the structure of
this jet that is coming from this
material surrounding the black hole
because these Jets are huge they're
often so much bigger than the Galaxy
itself m87 has a jet and it's absolutely
huge in comparison to the actual galaxy
now we've been able to see the shape of
3c 279 jet before but crucially what
this EHT images get has given us is the
shape and the detail incredibly close to
where that jet is actually being
launched from around the black hole now
we don't really understand how these
Jets are launched very well because we
think it's something to do with magnetic
fields and the joke in astrophysics is
that no one really understands magnetic
fields because they're very incredibly
incredibly complicated for 3c 279 for
example in this work that's come out
this month it showed that that jet very
close to the black hole is twisted and
bent and also rotating probably as well
so there's gonna have to be lots of
follow-up work done to really understand
the physics that's actually going on in
terms of why that jet is all bent and
what's going on in terms of magnetic
fields to explain that so when those
results come out I will make sure to let
you know what they find so that's it for
this month's distraction of space news I
will see you all next month but in the
meantime stay home stay safe but keep
looking up she really was she really was
a trail break she really was a trail
break
the trail brazen she next up Bella DITA
rude
you